What was to do or to make in Spanish?
Acer.
Good.
How would you say it does or it makes?
Ace.
Good.
Now ase you can use like a go.
Like in English when you say two weeks ago, you can say it makes two weeks in Spanish.
And you get that meaning.
So week is semana, two is do you remember two?
Dos.
So two weeks ago you will say it makes two weeks.
I saw him two weeks ago.
Lovi hace dos semanas.
Good.
To respond is responder.
Responder.
How would you say I responded?
Respondi.
How would you say I responded to her?
La respondi.
No, le.
Good.
Le respondi.
I responded to her.
I responded to her seven weeks ago.
Do you remember how to say seven related to September
Siete.
Siete, good.
So I responded to her seven weeks ago.
Lerespondi
Ace siete semanas.
Le respondi hace siete semanas.
Now in Spanish you can say I responded her it for example I responded
to her letter or I responded to her mail instead of saying it this way to her mail in Spanish you can just say
I responded him the mail.
I responded her the mail.
Or if you know what you're talking about, I responded him it.
I responded her it
This is because, and something we'll look at again later, Spanish does not use uh possessive words as much as English does.
So it would be much more natural in Spanish I responded her the male.
I responded him the male instead of I responded to her male.
So how would you say I responded her it which is in great English and it's perfect Spanish?
Se lo respondí.
Good
Se lo respondi.
So the se is actually le to her.
The lo is el male.
And you get se lo respondi.
I responded to her the male.
Good
Month is mess.
Mess.
M-E-S.
It's a masculine word, so how would you say the month?
El mes.
Good, then how would you say a month or one month?
Un mes.
So un mes can be a month or one month.
So how would you say I responded it to her one month ago?
I responded to her mail.
I responded her it one month ago
Se lo respondi hace un mes.
Good.
So we have respondi, I responded.
How would you say he, she, it you formal responded
Respondio.
Good.
And we responded.
Respondimos.
Good.
So respondi, respondio, respondimos.
Let's make a quick recap with an R verb.
How would you say discrimination?
Discrimination.
Again?
In English we say discrimination or discrimination?
It's with an eye, right?
Discrimination.
To discriminate Discriminar Discriminar I discriminated Discriminet Discriminet He or she or it you fumal discriminated
Discriminó.
Good.
And we discriminated.
Discriminamos.
Good.
So we have two more people to learn for the point in the past.
They and you informal.
Let's begin with you informal.
For you informal, in the point in the past, we have aste for r verbs and iste for er-ir verbs
Aste for R verbs and ist for er verbs.
So how would you say you spoke speaking informally?
Ablaste.
And you ate, speaking informally?
Comiste.
Good.
Did you eat?
Comiste?
Didn't you eat?
No comiste.
No comiste?
Didn't you eat it?
No lo comiste.
Salir.
How would you say did you go out?
Did you leave?
Saliste.
Good.
You didn't go out last night?
Last night is anoche.
Anoche
Anoche.
Now if you translate tonight directly, what you will come up with is anoche.
So you must be careful not to get confused here.
How do you say tonight in Spanish?
Esta noche this night.
So anoche is last night, not tonight.
So how would you say did you go out last night speaking informally?
Saliste anoche.
Good.
Didn't you go out last night?
No saliste anoche.
Good.
What was to live?
Vivir.
And how do you say where?
Donde.
Where did you live?
Donde Viliste Donde Biste Where were you living?
So that's
The line.
Donde vivías.
Good.
So in many cases both line and point are perfectly fine.
Donde viviste, donde vivías, all that means is that the speaker has two different ideas in their mind.
Maybe you go abroad to study and I will tell you
donde viviste or maybe I will tell you donde vivías donde viviste where did you live in this idea in my mind which is this
closed amount of time.
Where were you living?
Just means the idea in my mind is an ongoing idea of time.
So many times it's completely interchangeable.
What was to wait?
Esperar.
So for you informal, we have a ste for the point in the past.
So how would you say you waited?
Speaking informally.
Esperaste.
Good.
Did you wait for me?
Me Esperaste.
Mesperaste.
Didn't you wait for me?
Why didn't you wait for me?
Good.
What was to arrive?
Yegar.
Yagar, good.
How would you say when did you arrive?
When did you arrive informally?
Good.
Quando llegaste.
This is an example of when you would need the point.
Because you probably wouldn't want to say when were you arriving
No?
So here's very strongly the point in time.
When did you arrive?
Quando yegaste.
So we have aste and este for you in former.
For they we have aron
for our verbs and yeron for er ear verbs.
So how would you say they spoke?
They spoke
They waited.
Esperaron.
Good.
They prepared it.
Lo prepararon.
Good.
We have aron for our verbs
And eron I E R O N for er eer verbs.
How would you say they ate?
Komieron.
They left, they went out
Salieron.
They sold them.
Los vendieron.
Good.
So let's have a quick review of the panorama of this point in the past with Ablar and Khmer, which we might want to use as our hooks
So we'll begin with ablar.
How do you say I spoke?
Able.
He spoke.
We spoke.
You spoke in formal
Ablaste.
And they spoke?
Ablarun.
Ablaron.
Good.
Able, ablo, ablamos, ablaste, ablaron.
Now let's do the same for Khmer, so for er ear verbs.
How do you say I ate?
Come.
He, she, eat, you formula eight.
Comio.
We ate
Comemos.
That's the present.
Comimos.
Good.
You ate informally?
Comiste.
And they ate
So what's very interesting here is that for er verbs in the present we had e popping up everywhere.
No?
Bive vive
And just one e, just one e sound, just one i popping up, bivimos.
But everything else was e for er, ear verbs in the present.
But in the past.
for er ear verbs we have i dominating the stage we have the i e sound everywhere and this time the letter e the e sound
occupying only one space, popping up in only one place, which is ieron, comi, comio, comiste, comimos, comieron, which is the exact inverse of what happens in the present tense.
We can see also a logic that crosses over between the R group and the R-Ir group.
For example, we have I spoke.
How is it?
Able a ble, and he spoke ablo a blah
We saw the er-ir in this past point has a special affiliation to the i sound, the i, the letter i.
So whilst we have able for our verbs, for er ear verbs, what do we have?
How would we say I ate?
Komi.
And whilst we have ablo
For R verbs, what do we have for R ear verbs?
How would you say he ate?
Komio.
So it's like the R version but with that important E popping up again.
We have for we spoke, what do we have?
Hablamos.
And for we ate.
Comimos.
That important i, the i, the e sound again.
For you in Fumal spoke, what do we have?
A plaste.
Ablaste.
But you ate
Comiste.
You remember the importance of that eye?
They spoke
Ablaron.
Ablaron and they ate.
Again, that important I and that e
getting just one small look in in that dot in the past to remind us that this is er-ir group, not just ear.
Just as what happened the other way around in the present.
Good.